---
title: Rust
---

**[Rust](https://rust-lang.org/)** is arguably the most influential systems
programming language of the last decade. It brought the concepts of zero-cost
abstractions and provable memory safety to the mainstream, demonstrating that it
is possible to write high-performance code with the same level of safety one
might expect from a garbage-collected language. Its influence on the design of
modern programming languages, including Ribbon, cannot be overstated.

#### The Borrow Checker and Lifetimes

At the heart of Rust's safety promise is its revolutionary borrow checker. It
enforces a strict set of ownership rules at compile time, guaranteeing that code
is free from data races and use-after-free bugs. The mechanism that makes this
possible is **lifetimes**, a form of annotation that allows the compiler to
track how long references to data are valid.

This area of academic research was a big influence on Ribbon's own memory
safety model. The goal is the same: to make implicit programmer knowledge about
memory ownership an explicit, verifiable part of the program. However, we chose
a different set of trade-offs to achieve this.

- **Rust's Approach:** Focuses on the lifetime of individual values and
  references. This is incredibly precise and allows it to prevent a very broad
  class of memory errors. The trade-off is the complexity of the borrow-checking
  algorithms and the occasional need for manual lifetime annotations (`'a`) to
  guide the compiler.

- **Ribbon's Approach:** Focuses on the lifetime of the **memory region** an
  allocation belongs to, tracked via [[Phantom Types]]. This is similar in
  spirit but much simpler in mechanism. By tracking the allocator, Ribbon can
  perform its safety analysis entirely through standard type inference with no
  need for manual annotation. This prioritizes developer ergonomics, but it is a
  deliberate trade-off: it does not, by itself, prevent all memory errors (like
  a use-after-free within the same arena), but it provides powerful,
  statically-proven guarantees about how memory regions can interact.

#### A Broader View of Side Effects

In Rust, the primary axis for managing side effects is the distinction between
shared, immutable references (`&T`) and unique, mutable references (`&mut T`).
This is an incredibly effective model for preventing data races and is a
cornerstone of Rust's concurrency story.

While this model is undeniably powerful, Ribbon takes a complementary, more
granular view. We believe that mutation is just one of many side effects a
program might have. Using [[Algebraic Effects]], Ribbon's type system can track
a wide variety of effects—from memory access and I/O to logging and error
handling—as distinct, typed events. This allows a platform architect to define
fine-grained policies about what different parts of a program are allowed to do,
which is essential for building secure, sandboxed
[[Domain Specific Languages|DSLs]].

#### Inspiration from the Ecosystem

Beyond the core language, Ribbon draws immense inspiration from the Rust
ecosystem, particularly the **[Bevy game engine](https://bevy.org)**. Bevy is a
stunning demonstration of the incredible power that a rich type system and
advanced metaprogramming can bring to systems development.

Through its brilliant use of traits and procedural macros, Bevy provides a
high-level, data-driven, and incredibly ergonomic API for game development. Its
Entity Component System (ECS) is a masterpiece of type-driven design, and its
reflection capabilities show that it's possible to build dynamic, flexible tools
without sacrificing the performance of a compiled language.

Bevy's success is a profound inspiration for the Ribbon Language and its sibling
project, the [Ribbon Engine](https://ribbon-engine.com); proving that the
ambitious goal of combining high-level ergonomics with low-level control is not
only possible but is the future of building complex, interactive systems.